\chapter*{Abstract}

Conflict-free replicated data types (\CRDTs) are a natural structure with which
to communicate information about a shared computation in a distributed setting
where coordination overhead may not be tolerated, and individual participants
are allowed to temporarily diverge from the overall computation.  Within this
setting, there are two classical approaches: state- and operation-based \CRDTs.
The former define a commutative, associative, and idempotent \textit{join}
operation, and their states a \textit{monotone join semi-lattice}. The latter
communicate \textit{operations}, the join of which is non-idempotent. Whereas
op-based \CRDTs require little information to be exchanged, they demand
relatively strong network guarantees (exactly-once, in-order delivery), and
state-based \CRDTs suffer the opposite problem. Both satisfy \textit{strong,
eventual consistency} (\SEC)

We posit that $\delta$-\CRDTs~\citep{almedia18} both (1) require minimal
communication overhead from payload size, and (2) tolerate relatively weak
network environments, making them an ideal candidate for real-world use of
\CRDTs. Our central intuition is to note a key similarity between state- and
op-based \CRDTs. Namely, that state-based \CRDTs are equivalent to op-based
\CRDTs when the operation is a join of the state. We extend the previous line of
work in \cite{gomes17} by formalizing this intuition in Isabelle and extending
the mechanized proofs presented there to show that state-based \CRDTs achieve
\SEC. We then weaken the network model in \cite{gomes17} and show that
state-based \CRDTs still maintain \SEC. Finally, we extend our work to gossip
members of the \textit{sub-lattice}, thus showing that $\delta$-\CRDTs achieve
\SEC also, even under relatively weak network guarantees.
